---
title: "Rust 2019 (11): Tackling growth and tone"
---

# Rust 2019 (11): Tackling growth and tone

The Rust project has grown _massively_ over the recent years. I think a lot of
people are not even aware of how much. With over 100 team members nowadays and
about 4700 contributors to the main repositories (all under github.com/rust-lang
minus LLVM and jemalloc forks, I counted on Jan 15th), we're in the _upper
crowd_ of FOSS projects globally. This is not including working group
organisations like WASM, embedded or net! All this with a mostly volunteer team
and a really small paid crew. Just as a comparison: Go, often used as a
benchmark for our community, has about 2400 contributors! All this considering
that Go has been in 1.0 much longer! These comparisons are not rigourous, but
important to recalibrate. Speaking on a project level, we are _the biggest and
most accessible_ project in the last wave of programming languages.

Yet, as
[Dirkjan](https://dirkjan.ochtman.nl/writing/2019/01/01/rust-2019-ownership-without-fear.html)
correctly notes, there's now "users who keep posting vague forum threads or
exert significant stop energy on others' proposals". I would add that we now
have users that straight out try to frame the Rust project, the mods and
especially core as some kind of evil force that does not work in the interest of
users.

I do agree that we have homework to do with regards to community interaction,
especially with clarity of communication. The blogging campaign in 2018 and 2019
are an attempt to make it easier for community members to give their feedback in
one block. The new website was an attempt to fix a lot of glaring mistakes of
the old page. There an interplay between the growth and community behaviour,
though. And it won't go away: good community work builds communities, which
leads more community work...

I sadly must say that as much as the interaction on the website last year has
frustrated community people, it was also not a stellar display of respect
towards people working on Rust. While it's easy to put the blame on the Rust
team for delivering rough (and we take the blame!), some people have used the
chance for showing abyssimal behaviour.

## Community tone towards the project is the communities work

The Rust project provides moderation for some spaces, notably out GitHub
trackers, Reddit, URLO and IRLO. "Moderation" is often just attached to the
actions of banning, kicking and whatever, but is actually the task of keeping a
discussion in useful boundaries. Most of what the moderation team is doing is
_discuss_. But it's literally impossible, and also unwanted, to make the
moderation team to be the arbiter of what's acceptable and what not. Community
norms are, ultimately, _the communities job_.

Here's the great thing: everyone can do that! Everyone can moderate! Get more
used to calling out people that you feel are overstepping boundaries! Help
people that seem to struggle with giving feedback! Spend some time with other
community members to think about how to deliver a piece of criticism. It
probably _improves_ the chances of the feedback being taken into regards!

The Rust community is known as friendly and approachable and we want to keep
that. This is _everyones_ job. If you agree with this as a guiding principle,
you should promote it. The Rust project may have ultimately kicked things off,
but a mature community must live without its roots.

This doesn't mean that everything must be roses: strong, structured, actionable
criticism is the gold of our community. Let's have more of it!

## Our communication towards the community is our work

We've been rushed by success. Being one of the fastest growing FOSS projects is
not an easy feat and our interaction culture needs to change along. We do a ton
on that level: There's a weekly newsletter, the open RFC process, we're one of
the most active projects on GitHub. Still, more and more people feel
ill-informed or are frustrated by intransparent processes. Distance and lack of
visibility builds tension. It's hard to figure out how teams come to be and it's
hard to follow their work. Some of this is inherent in the volume, but some of
it also stems from employing the same communication strategies as three years
ago.

Finding new ways to make community interaction work in a transparent ways is
important. Some of this will be nailing down policy and allow new working groups
to form. The other will be finding ways to make getting an overview over the
project better. We have experimented with tools like the [Herald](https://herald.community.rs)
in the past, to have a more unified stream of incoming news, but yet have to see
adoption. I'm also having a hard time finding projects of our size that do
_obviously better_ than we do.

If you feel like this is a teasing issue to you, by all means [get in touch with me](mailto:flo@andersground.net)
or the [community team](mailto:community@rust-lang.org).